It is 7:02.
I will call the regular meeting of the
Andor Planning and Zoning Commission to
order. Next up is roll call and seating
of alderman.
So we've
got
start to vote first.
[Music]
Yeah, you're not able to. Okay, there we
go.
Then we
got me. So Kevin and Amarie, thank you
for coming tonight. the uh but we won't
be seeing either of you and
uh and if uh I think everybody knows
that Susan England resigned since uh the
last time we
met she just got a bunch of different
family issues going on kind of like
Steve Nelson did earlier and that has
not allowed her to take take the
uh time she needs to dedicate to that.
So, she submitted her
resignation. Next up is additions or
changes to the agenda and I have none.
Anybody
else?
No. So, with at that point, we'll move
on to public speak. anybody from the
public here that wants to uh to speak
about anything that we're not going to
be talking about on the
agenda and looks like a note there as
well. So, next up is old business and we
start out with the plan of conservation
and
development. And I guess we'll let
Patrick and Elaine take it away. Oh,
we'll let Patrick take it away. Not just
that.
Very good. It's all yours, Patrick. Oh,
thank you. Um, is can somebody show me
how to share the uh power on the screen
here? Sure. John, can you make sure you
give Patrick permission to share? Yep.
Sharing is allowed.
Oh, there's a button. Share. Click
share.
Okay. Right there. Yeah. And say share.
Great. Thank you.
want to hit that
button right
there. Should that
work? You should
[Music]
there. You win. Thank you.
And that's one step more than I was ever
able to do. I got a bad tree off the
board. That was as good as I can do. So
you're off and running. All
right. So these are the concepts and
ideas that economic development
commission is going to recommend for our
next plan of conservation development.
Um, we're going to be focusing
on smaller scale neighborhood based
businesses and we need to help them grow
here in Andover because a lot of
homebased businesses start and then they
outgrow their house and then they want
to they they they expand, but then they
move their business to some of our
surrounding towns and cities which have
more commercial um spaces available. And
so we want to start making sure that
they can thrive here.
Um so going hand in hand with that, we
want to make sure that you know the the
all the services and businesses that
everybody was surveying in our town, the
coffee shops, the home services, bicycle
shops, restaurants and maybe small
workshops will be available here without
traveling to the next on you know. Um we
also are investigating small business
mixeduse hubs. So that's an that's a
concept that we we talked about 10 years
ago um with mixed use development. So
that's the ability to have a dwelling on
the same property as commercial
building. Um now we don't currently to
my knowledge have any but that's really
kind of what we're looking for. But
we've got the regulation to support it.
The regulations are already there.
They're startup, but I think we need to
really define what we would like to see,
you know. Okay. That's that's the main
point. Tweak to fit. Yes.
Tweak it. Tweak. Okay. And to fit
Andover's rural character. I mean, you
know, we want it to still look like
Andover without looking overdeveloped.
And over better.
True.
Uh, one of the one of the things we
could do is expand as red uses for these
mixed use facilities. Um, and going hand
in hand what we just talked about is the
design guidance. So some people call it
um design standards. Um, but we would be
calling it design guidance. You know,
these are the types of buildings that we
think fit in our our neighborhood and
our our surrounding towns. um and
encourage anybody who wants to develop
in our town to follow suit. Um we also
investigated uh some towns they convert
older houses that may be in a hight
traffic area into small restaurants and
that's one of the things we're looking
into.
And yeah, there we go. We we still are
we want to keep the town
cured page.
We're also really excited to try and
promote some more tourism in our town.
Um before I go through the list, I a
couple years back my wife and I were up
at the old town hall and uh we met some
travelers from out of the country and
they were, you know, looking at all the
colonial sites and there's a couple
markers here and there, but that's
really what a lot of people come to our
town for. They want to go down the
trail. really want to see the sort of
places and so that's stressed here in
the slide I
think oh maybe not the slide okay back
to the list
um yeah actually it's first thing on
list um town guides and some of them
being maybe located at or near the trail
crossings focus on our historic places
like the Roshambo marker
um really investigate
the auxiliary uses for farms, farm
farmers markets, um agurism fairs and to
maybe sponsor local events.
Um, also we need to
really finalize what properties are best
suiting for these needs because we
really don't want to encroach on the
conservation land and get too close to
the river. We really want to keep, you
know, we don't want to just do the whole
strip of Route 6. You know, that would
be
counterproductive. Um,
also we want people to be able to walk
or bike there. That's one of the big
goals that we've been that was
identified in the last plan conservation
development and we see all the the the
sher now and we have crossings on Route
6 and that's going to help with tourism.
Oh, and now also the last
thing we don't have really any lodging
power. So if we're going to try to track
tourism, we need to address that too.
Would that be the bed and breakfast
thing? Bed and breakfast to start and
maybe some smaller Maybe a
hotel. Um, yeah, because I mean we've
got them in the veterans. Um, Agent
Orange
Memorial and there's a very I think we
might we're the only ones in the state,
you know. So, a lot of people come just
to be there just to sit there and then
and where do they go? What do they do?
So,
be good to have something. Definitely
good points. I think uh with the hotel
lodging we got to be careful a little
bit because there are people moving
there permanently.
So the homeless people whatever um
Airbnb is more popular amongst people
who travel like that I think. Um so I'm
sure it's it's worth doing a survey.
Just go on Airbnb and look at Andover
and Columbia. How many Airbnbs are
you'll be surprised to see there are so
spend their money here in Andover.
Absolutely. No absolutely. Yeah. And you
know for them a two-minute drive from
Colombia Lake to Andover is an issue to
spend that money. So I mean
yeah that leads us to we did a lot of
discussion and we would like to see the
town as develop later.
Um, and that that goes hand in hand with
literally acquiring property if possible
and
um, you know, see that the town can make
some money off of their own properties
if possible. Um, we also talked about a
town business park other than retail, so
something off of Route 6 that would spur
economic growth. Um and also the small
business mixeduse hubs and
uh John brought up our town planner
calls it a sinking fund for development
land and that's like a uh kind of like a
uh you can pipe in John and explain
that. I I'm sorry I don't know what's
Well, it's it's basically the converse
of setting aside money to acquire open
space. um you know, you you establish a
fund, you you set aside a little bit of
money every year and and then you have a
fund available should uh a a a you know,
a targeted a targeted property become
available or or someone offers you uh
you know an an opportunity. So it's it's
just having having funds at the ready
over time.
Thank you. So, one of the thoughts, you
know,
that I was always disappointed that we
didn't get the little piece of land off
of Beer Valley that out back here
budding, you know, down property
and and at the time we were only looking
at open space.
And I said, I'm not sure we really
wanted that open space. that would be
the kind of thing that the town would
want so that we could you build nice
housing development or something back
there and have the access both through
here or from offer valley road that kind
of thing. So it was you know in
retrospect but then we all see how
successful we were getting money in the
budget for open space this year a lot
long thinking about uh you know just
buying property for other things. So
that's going to be a bit of a of a
stretch, but yeah, it may be seen as
differently, too, because people
realize, no, now we're putting a fund to
go ahead and get areas for development
that the town can benefit from as
opposed to just open space, so nothing
happens there. You know what I mean? It
might they might see it differently, but
I never
Yeah. the the need to have the town
purchase property to spur the
development is one of those light bulbs
that started to come on with me and yeah
I see that need
and a lot of the discussion came because
like I uh I was with the hot river six
um LA plan that was done and they talked
about the village node and they kept
bringing up the village node and that's
where we said Oh, we need mixed use
areas so they can have housing, little
shops and and stuff all in one area. And
they came up with great plans, things to
do. Um, and it went nowhere. So, this is
kind of a we still have that vision. You
still kind of want to move it forward
and do something with it. Um it was it
was a value to look at and they even
talked about the small business um
little industrial park out there on the
back post property you know that
offic you know to utilize land um for
economic growth. So it was it was great.
We just want to keep building on. Okay.
Sounds good.
And that leads us right into housing
economic development. We do have we've
identified need for more starter and and
downsizer options which would be you
know smaller square footage residences
um and more um in the middle of the
price range because it seems in our town
we have the gap. Some people call it
miss and middle some sometimes it's
called the gap you know between the
lowest and the highest price houses in
our town. Um I remember from the last
conservation development plan uh like an
average teacher salary can they buy a
house in our town and what's the
availability for them to stay in our own
town?
Um also, uh the smaller house and parcel
sizes in plan
development. We're revisiting
regulations on accessory dwelling units
and drain pods. We already have um
in-law apartment allowances that can be
attached to your house. We're going to
look more into that. Uh over 55 housing
availability. So with the but don't I
would think I would say that we allow
ranny
bodies now now maybe you're talking
about something that's not got a
permanent foundation or something bring
in a trailer or something I don't know
but you know the the accessory boing
unit I thought was the same thing. It's
similar but uh I think right now we're
not we don't permit people to live in
trailers in our town as we don't as of
like as right but we could identify
areas where that might be acceptable
right we do for a period of time for a
certain amount of time
not really I mean on a case by case
basis the CPA has allowed that in the
past in case seen cases where a house
burned down because of a fire or
something that allowed somebody to live
in a you know a trailer on site for a
period of time while the house is
reconstructed.
state I
know the state.
Yes, and I'd have to go back and check.
I I'm pretty confident we're
not in total compliance with that public
act
2129 did talk about allowing traders in
our reg currently for a period of time.
Yeah, I don't know the details. It was
never never got around to that one yet.
Well, it had started like with an
appeals process. Like you said, CBA was
working. So, if we can make it some kind
of a standard, then people don't have to
go to appeals every time they want to do
something.
Well, but you have to ask yourself, is
that really what you want to do? Maybe
yes. I'm not saying yes or no. I'm just
saying that that's something certainly
in the past. middle housing. Middle
housing is all of this.
Well, middle housing, the the term
middle housing really relates more
towards duplexes and triplexes. That's
what's traditionally considered middle
housing density. So, it's not an
apartment complex, but it's duplex or
triplex. Right. And there are serious
bills up in the legislature right now
that would essentially force towns to uh
allow duplexes and triplexes as of
right. Don't think they'll go anywhere
in this legislative session. But um this
10year plan will work with that. So
yeah. No, I'm just giving you the
history. Yeah. Right. And we could we
could do that in town with our current
regulations, you know, and uh I'm
certainly not opposed to that. I my my
sense is there's probably some
residential areas where people wouldn't
want to duplex showing up in the middle
of that. But if we were to have
a middle or affordable housing
development someplace that's not
sprinkled all over town, but kind of
clustered together, I think that'd be a
great thing. you know, and even the 55
housing plus housing. I know we had an
approved lot up there at the end of Bear
Swamp, right? I think M's property or
something, but then things changed and
there was no money to go ahead and do
it. So, you know, when I was selling
that lot across 162 acres across from um
the dub, we transfers the
trans, you know, some of the plans we
were showing was 55 housing, you know,
possibilities and stuff, but you know,
thank the person who bought it like had
one residence on it. It's like, oh well,
then goes that. Let let me know when
across the street from bear for sale.
I'll buy it. I live like right there.
There's no way I'm gonna want anything.
The reason why I bought that house is
because I'm next to the forest. It's
quiet. Yeah. So, if it goes up for sale,
let me know. And that's that's a good
point. Like that's why it's important
for us to identify the areas where these
ideas will work. where and we have to
pipe over the summer. Yeah, there's
still some more I think 55, right? 55.
Yeah. Well, it doesn't have to. We could
do a mixeduse uh development along Route
Six or something to uh to do that. But
again, it's you know, it's a localized
thing. It's
not people out on beer swarm aren't
going to be offended by the fact we've
got you know some tri flexes and that in
like lone corners for instance you know
right down there off 87 in round six.
Yeah, your period of life where you are
makes a difference. When we moved here
20 years ago, we were looking for land
in the quiet in the woods. We bought two
acres. Now, we can't afford to maintain
something like that. So, we're very glad
we had built the in-law apartment on it
and we moved into that now. Yeah. And
now we would really jump at something
like the 55 housing, the middle housing,
something. Um, we got friends who are
moving into a 55 plus community in
Mansfield up Newton store on 44. You
know, it first looked like it's a
trailer park, but they it's a 55 plus.
They're putting in double wides in there
and
Jensen
is 44 right before you get one. It's a
very nice little community and it's
close. You know, it's close but that's
what people want when they're that age
and they can't afford or maintain and if
we could find some way to do that and to
your point you want to stay in town
size. So moving into a 55 locally would
make sense.
We got a lot of people that are head
I know.
I heard there might be a property for
sale.
Can we build a bridge across the bear
swamp so I can get to that?
Okay, go ahead. I see you got the sewer
thing there. Yeah, that a last minute
addition to my
presentation because uh practically
speaking, we we do know there's new
smaller package wastewater systems
available. Um and we're lucky enough to
have Megan on our economic thumb. She's
very versed in um the the how the water
needs to be treated and you know um but
that we also talked about having the
sewer connection along Route 6. Now that
would be the biggest
that's right and and at that point um if
it was connected it would open up a lot
more possibilities. That's I I added to
the list. Yeah. So in has there been any
discussion with the board of selectment
on anything like that? Sure. Yeah.
People bring it up. But it's not like
doesn't go anywhere. Okay.
I think it
is a need for connected just like
Yeah. The uh my thought was at some
point the need for affordable housing
will be so great that the state will pop
up money and put in a sewer so we can
put in affordable housing and then we
want to have it in our POC that we're
ready to uh support that you
know if we were to be that uh get that
kind of a financial break and there's
always talk of having to get a sewer
system over by the lake at some point in
not being forced to do it. And if that's
the case, then we're coming up from
Columbia and then that opens up that
little
87 corner area and all it'll have.
You never know. We can dream.
The other the other thing to consider is
that the health codes in Connecticut
have been relaxed somewhat in the last
four to five years. So you're allowed to
have a lot more discharge into a system
without tripping higher levels of
scrutiny. So I mean you can certainly
today cluster like it works to cluster
like up to eight genie homes on one
septic system and on a single well
today. So one of the ways you can build
that cluster is to just do that and and
so there's advantages and disadvantages
to the what's called packet septic
treatment plants. Um their success rate
has not been super great um both in
Connecticut and New England. And the
thing to keep in mind as a town is
that if it's a true
packet wastewater system, it's a town
responsibility
ultimately if it fails, not the
community's responsibility. And that's a
little weirdness in Connecticut's law.
However, if you have say eight tiny
homes with one leech field, that is not
a packet wastewater system and that is
the the owner's responsibility. So, from
a liability standpoint, you know, today
the ability to cluster that makes a lot
of sense. Um, if it's designed
thoughtfully, I think you certainly can
do a series of small developments if
it's done really thoughtfully
um, and be successful. And I shared
examples of that with the commission in
the past.
That's it.
So, let me just, you
know, one of the things that that I
think is an opportunity right now and
maybe they come and go all the time.
We've got three big parcels of land that
are sitting out there for sale signs on
it, you know. Well, I guess Linds
Quarters probably dozen, but we got the
fence farm and we got the gravel pit,
you know, across the street from it and
You would think there might I don't know
if we have any thoughts on how to take
advantage of that
opportunity that's in there now.
Well, we do I
mean being a real estate agent has
definitely been in communication with a
lot of developers. Okay. And so we that
whole area I guess the the auto parts
part of it sold.
I am not aware of that. Yeah, that might
have sold, but hopefully it's still the
area to the right of it is available
still because that would be a good spot
for one of these um multiple businesses,
you know, like some some incubator kind
of um
buildings where people can have, you
know, you know, different spots in the
building for their
businesses. Um that that would be an
ideal spot for them.
But, you know, it's a matter of getting
developers interested in maybe doing
that. Yep. But certainly the town won't
be able to buy it. But, well, we've had
some initial conversations with Mr.
Fitch on his tree farm that a nice place
for a mixeduse development kind of
thing. And uh we've had some
conversations with uh the fellow that
owns the Lindo Corners out there and uh
he sounded like he was enthused a little
bit, but you know, we've never heard
anything back where
they're ready to do anything. I'm not
sure what it is that uh that's holding
them back, but
uh if we don't guide what we want to
show up there, you know, and if I'm not
unhappy with the Dollar General, then we
got there, but uh you know, I thought
that worked out fairly well.
you know, I don't know what the next one
to come down that everybody's going to
be at
with trying to uh it's it's one of the
things about
general. So I in go to rich area
dirtiest one I ever seen
last paper plates and that's right
so the other thing for a small single
unit to go that you could consider is
when the town
acquired using money from the open space
fund, the Merit property, um, which is
between Lake Road and the rail trail and
316 or correction Route Six. And then on
the other side of that, we bought that
as multiple parcels. And the reason we
did that is there's a parcel in there
that we got them to donate. In other
words, we paid a little bit more for the
other with the open space funds and
permanently heated that. But there is a
piece in there that's about I don't know
25,000 square feet that is it's in the
commercial zone. Um the town owns it and
there are no development restrictions on
that. So if you ever had somebody who
had a legitimate and probably the
smartest thing to do is put something
that's trailbased business in there. Um
you've got curb cut and you know you've
got the ability to develop that. So just
keep that in mind and that system will
need to identify put on paper put on
maps so that developers realize that.
Yep. The other property that would
be have commercial potential is the
property that's relatively easy to
develop because it's fairly flat and
that is the property directly adjacent
to the network group. Um, currently
owned by the Jaff Group.
um nobody knows quite how to get a hold
of the J group because the uh LLC that
controlled that um was dissolved um been
trying to collect taxes for them for
quite a while. Um it will go into tax
foreclosure this year um probably in the
next couple months. So that's something
that's of interest. Um be aware that
that's possibility.
matter. It's a pretty good question. Um,
a lot of it's wetland, a lot of it's
right by the
river stuff by uh Route Six is highly
developable. Um, certainly the town home
probably smart thing to do would be to
buy it, carve off the front part as
commercial um and leave the rear and
open space so that can use
it. But that's Also,
any other questions for the economic
development team?
Nice job.
So, John, next up, you and
your Mary
folks crash into a chapter like you did
with the conservation one. Absolutely.
So, um I'm going to just throw on the
screen um a a proposed schedule. Um
having a hard time here. At least I am.
I don't know if you can raise the volume
on your mic there or not. Okay. Is that
any better? Yeah. Yeah. Okay. All I need
to do is hold it less than two inches
from my mouth, I guess. Um All right.
I'm going to just throw up a
um a draft calendar sort of going
forward and and conversations had with
Jed this week or last week um indicated
we would like to finish this off this
this calendar year ideally. Um and so
what's best because we have some public
uh notification requirements associated
with the with the public hearings of a
of a planet conservation development is
to start from the end. Um and so looking
back uh working backwards from a
presumed public hearing and adoption
date and and so you need to have a
public hearing before adoption. It could
happen at the same meeting. Um so we'll
schedule that. We'll again and we'll
base this basically on our planning and
zoning commission schedule. So December
would be the public hearing and
adoption. Backing up um we basically
need to give two months notice. So the
actual finalizing of the drafts has to
happen in October and we'd post the
notice with the town clerk and the state
and the and the region um at the at the
October meeting where at which time we
would ideally sort of say okay this is
this is the plan that we're going to be
working with. Um so then working back
from there, September we would um look
at the implementation draft um including
so whatever whatever additional maps
we're going to be including although
most of the maps are going to be
included in in the various chapters like
we did with conservation and complete
complete streets and then um working
back from September basically set
ourselves on a uh one draft per one
chapter per meeting schedule in which we
would um have the have the the draft
reviewed and sort of ceue up the next
draft. And I'm again I'm doing this in
reverse order. So, but let let's
actually let's start where we are today.
Um which is April we'll review the
conservation chapter which we which had
a number of edits and we began the
economic development discussion. We will
write economic development draft uh
ahead of the May meeting. So for your
review in May and then we'll begin our
housing discussion which is the next
chapter. We'll review the draft of the
housing chapter in June. begin the
quality of life discussion that chapter
will be written in July or for July then
our resilience discussion and then the
it's climate change and resilience that
draft would be reviewed in August and
then we would start the process of
wrapping things up in the fall um but
yeah so basically you know starting
starting last month when we when we
delivered um the initial conservation
chapter draft we'll we'll start knocking
down these pins one by one uh into the
into the
Does that make sense?
So when we we first started the journey
towards updating the planet conservation
development, you know, we
uh we had a schedule that was about
April through December and we've been
working on it for a while now, good year
anyhow. And uh and I think we have done
an awful lot of good ground work on it.
I think we got a couple of the uh the
tougher chapters
um in pretty good shape. They're getting
started. So,
uh I was about ready to say, "No, handrs
on the wall. We're not going to get it
done this year." But I really didn't
want to jeopardize any of the town's
funding, you know, by not having that
thing done. you know, uh, they're tying
grant money and all that kind of stuff.
Uh, I don't know if they
would tie all the, you know, like school
money and that to it or not, but it's a
g whiz, it would really be nice if we
had it done on time and uh, not put it
down in that predicament to say, "We're
really close." At the same time, you
know, I like the way we've got started
is going, you know, I think we're
putting out a good quality product for
what we've done so far. Um, and I don't
want to do that. And
so, that's a fairly aggressive schedule
that John just showed you there. But,
uh, I do think it's it's doable and,
uh, we ought to, uh, we ought to at
least have that as goal. Something,
right? We don't want to get there, get
anybody in trouble for not having not
having RVs or that. So,
and Jed, the one thing I would note is I
I don't think we're at any genuine risk
of of losing eligibility on state funds,
particularly if we keep OPM um well
informed about our progress. Uh you
know, and they they understand that
things slip sometimes. You know, they
they in fact had a a 5-year plan of
conservation and development that wasn't
written until the fourth year of that
plan. So, um, they they are have
generally been willing to to work with
towns, particularly if they're, you
know, demonstrating that they're working
on on the progress. But, yeah, I think
it it'll just take a little bit of
discipline on all of our parts.
Obviously, ours to do the do the writing
and you guys to um review and and have
comments ready for the meetings and and
we'll we'll proceed.
Okay. Thank you, John.
Um, next up on the
agenda, if anybody I I know we talked
about questions for uh Elaine and
Patrick. I can't remember if we got any
or not, but uh
I Yes. So, with the the economic
development chapter, we're looking there
was talk of a number of parcels. You're
looking at actually create having a map
embedded within the chapter that would
identify those partials for development.
Correct. Okay. Yeah, that's yeah, we
want to really get them identified as
soon as possible. Okay. Instead of just
Oh, maybe someday. Okay. So, my followup
question to that then is the process you
would included which was great. We love
to see that coordinating with PNZ and
conservation commission on what are the
parcels that are most suitable. So the
pro because we're all developing our
scapulars you know we did our process we
didn't necessarily communicate you got
and you were you with us so the process
for how that occurs so that you know is
that a sit down is that a meeting of the
commit the planning and zoning so we're
looking at that and sort of saying yeah
okay yeah that works that works that one
doesn't that works with these sort of
considerations so that your your map
dubtales with our map you know there's
synergies
Yeah. So, I'm Yeah, I think I'm kind of
the ring leader on that effort, although
I'm looking for the action item to show
up in the EDC chapter because that is
our
BOC. Um, but I kind of, you know, I
think we need to
go almost partial by partial down Route
Six and say what we want to do here.
Here's a nice piece of farm. What can we
do to preserve it? you know, here's
where some nice little businesses could
go. This is currently zoned uh
industrial, but you know, might be
better off business because, you know, I
think
industrial there's not the industries
that they used to have for, you know,
small little places. You know, there's
more we're going to do a better job of
getting little businesses than little
industries. Um,
and
so I'm looking to that to have probably
a due
date, not before we issue the report
because, you know, I think we've got a
hard enough road to home to get the the
report done by the end of the year. But
soon thereafter, we should be getting
together and saying, "Nope, this is an
area we want to conserve. know if this
is an area we want to develop and and
have that discussion. My question, Jed,
is that my concern is that if if a map
comes out separately from economic
development, y you know, we've got our
our one I don't know if recreation's
creating something looking at, you know,
trails, various other areas, they'll be
without sort of a in the process if
they're going to be in that document
somewhere in this process of the
preparation for the document there
should be some coordination so that we
all agree that that's yeah, that that is
this or we have a disagreement minutes
in that it gets wrapped into the 10-year
plan of how do we resolve that type of
thing. So rather than have the plan come
out and then we have that meeting we say
well geez that that's wrong. We are
fortunate enough that John working with
his team has drafted both your chapter
and he's going to be drafting the
economic development chapter and so he
has an understanding of what we're
trying to do there and I think it's
going to probably come out right. If it
doesn't, we'll find out at the next
meeting when we see the the chapter
here. But
will I was going to say we we could
always have a separate meeting like
meeting that way. We've had the full
size maps because one of the other
challenges is trying to view it on a
computer screen and it's it's
challenging and that's you know to have
the full size maps or uh some way that
we can both you know your maps were
incredible that that already been
generated but we don't really have EDC
maps other than what's already on the
top books and that's another you know
thing that John with us has been working
on fairly uh you know took a lot more
that I thought it was going to do is to
get that computerized GIS broad map so
that it would be functioning for us as a
zoning map. We could do that now with we
can call up the parallel maps and go I I
don't mean this meeting we could do
that. Yeah. You know, and say look what
are these because you know I I guess you
know there's multiple ways to do it. I'm
just don't I'm just concerned that we
come out with a document that we haven't
sort of done that coordination around.
So if the plan is that you know John's
going to put together these drafts then
is the review process is like we
reviewed the conservation chapter. Yep.
But I didn't anticipate looking at the
economic development chapter or is there
going to be a review process that's
broader? So it's not just economic
development looking at their chapter,
you know, they can see our chapter so
that we can say, "Oh, geez, this is a
Yeah, it's really important." Yeah.
Yeah. We should have joint committee
meetings at the very least or Yeah. And
it was my intention to do that before
January. Yeah. But I was I thought we
would be done with that whole project
six months ago and you know we're not
even ready to start having that
conversation because we're trying to get
street to that on on the map. I I don't
actually think it will be because the
parcel
maps, you know, albeit that the the
crowd parcel map still there's some
funkiness in some of the lines, but
that's sort of the standard everybody's
using right now. It would be in my view
pretty easy to put that up. We have our
layers in in GIS. We can call up layers
and say, "Look, here's here's what's
here for wetlands. Here's what's here
for endangered species. Here's what's
here for forest sand gravel deposits."
It's a matter of what we don't know is
what you know is that this one is more
suitable to this. You know, this would
be great to develop. So, we could sit
down in a working session figure out,
get that one works, this is great in
these areas. So that when you're
creating your map, you know that we're
completely 100% supportive of those
parcels, you know, it's not like there's
a uh, you know, for development.
we we agree on because we're calling
them out necessarily as we've identified
you know undeveloped private properties
but we haven't said that that should
necessarily be preserved or that will
discipline that guides that I think
along the lines of those need to be
preserved
yeah we have a sense of that basically
but we we we're using our database of
the natural resource inventory to guide
our prioritization so but we're not
coming out necessarily say because we
want to see that's more of a
collaborative to say because we
recognize there's other values. So the
question is is all right how do we as a
town figure out where those are the best
parcels because there's two key
questions. There's the where and then
there's also the how. So for example, in
some of those parcels, we may have
conservation values that are high, but
if the development is done in a
particular way, there's a synergy there,
you know, and there's numerous cases
that would fit that with parcels here.
um you know with and Eric mentioned one
you know with that property that uh uh
was next to the network where you know
he could potentially have the rear of it
be conservation because of the wetlands
and proximity to the river but the front
end of it on your six thing can support
development and then it's a matter of
the best development practices around
wetlands and it's a it's a win-win. So,
but so it's that it's sitting down and
saying, "Okay, here's the ones so that
they can do that and we know that using
the information that we already have."
So, you're already using the GIS map as
your base map. Yes. So, if you can just
use the GIS map as your base map and
everyone operates on the same as base
map, you highlight the ones you want. We
overlay them and then we just talk about
the ones that overlap the discussion.
And
then if there's ones that you want and
you have no environmental. So, yeah,
here here's my concern. We've spent a
year
getting one chapter done. In the next
six months, we're going to do six
more. I am interested in capturing the
action items put into the plan, then we
can go work on it. Otherwise, we'd had
this done five years ago. Why didn't we
do it five years ago?
you know, I we we've got to get the plan
done and then the plan is going to give
us some actions that we go
do. I would love to have all the actions
done before we initiate the plan, but
that's that's not the way it's working.
It's not how it works. I mean, this is
supposed to be for the next 10 years
what we're going to be working on. Okay,
this is now a good thing to go work on.
I just don't think
soaps need to be done for the
PLC to be done because of what we put in
the PS. So let me let me understand. So
what you prefer a method where we have
these individual maps that you've
identified areas that are important for
economic you feel are important for
economic development. We've identified
areas that are for conservation areas.
We put this plan together that has these
goals and objectives associated with
these and then you would then take that.
So that's the plan that the state would
see and others would see and then over
that 10year period
that's you would those different ones.
else and I think it would be a lot
quicker than over that 10 year period
but I don't think we I don't think we
can go quick enough to get it done
between now and the end of the year. So
don't so we have a map a GIS overlay
that has all the what the conservation
commission has identified. We have a we
have mapped the natural resources. Okay.
And and we have mapped existing open
space and we we've mapped the
um the parcels that are uh undeveloped.
Okay. So those are the elements that can
be used to make recommendations about
parcels that you want to develop or
they're used for various practice
practices.
So, and you guys presumably have a map
that shows which parcels or which areas
you think support what type of
development whether higher intensity
residential or you know commercial
we don't have a physical
map we have
ideas what kind of development we want
to see where the development It's going
to How many of these things have we had
in the last five years where we've had
to even discuss it? How many times has
somebody come up and said, "I want to
develop this property on Route Six."
And there's never been that
discussion. You know, I uh I I think we
could wait till January to to do it
right. I'm concerned about it. We try to
squeeze that in. talent it uh I don't
have to be able to do it, you know, and
and it's my EOCD. I I got to be able to
uh you know, only drive the bus as far
as fast as I'm capable of driving the
bus, you know, and and I
look at when we look at that schedule
that John put out, I'm looking at any
minute the gravel pit could bite us in
the butt and and take us full time. any
minute you know
uh Mr. Pitch put in his request for agro
tourism thing and then we're on the
clock to get that done and and that's
going to be
priority. You know I I've been trying to
get there's a guy on Lake Road who wants
to turn his house from a three season to
a year round. I've been trying to get
him to come in and talk to the
commission so I can at least figure out
what regulate regulatory changes we do
before he drops that and we're on the
clock for that one. But I know there's
going to be permits that are going to
come in and it's going to take
everything I got to deal with that and
I'm not going to be able to deal with
the PCD to get it where I want it to go.
And and I got uh you know I want to do a
good job. I think we we've got the
vision now that we didn't have a year
ago that we need this group session to
go look first parcel by parcel to do
that. And I think we can even extend it
down 3:16 because we got some nice
historic houses there that I think would
be uh you know could be
uh turned into a bed breakfast or
restaurant or professional building or
stuff like that.
But but I just don't think I have the
ability to get that where you're
looking. And I know exactly where you
want to go, Nick. And I'm committed to
going there. I just can't do it right
now. And my concern is we don't get
there. Okay. That once once you've got
maps that
identify maps that are separate from Let
me stop there because we worked we've
been working. You know, one of the
things that I told Jim, you're not going
to retire till this map is done. Okay,
you're retired now. Mount's not done.
And we're halfway there. You know, we
have not even talked about what's the
best use of the land that I thought was
going to be finishing that up. And we've
been working on that for six or eight
months now, just to get it to the point
and I'm stopping that effort until we
get done with PC. And then we're going
to take that math and talk about the
best use for the different parcels. And
then is the PCB amended or is it No,
that's one of the action items in the
PCB is to have that meeting and
create what I would suggest if you're
going to do that is that you make a plan
right up front that you're going to
adopt additional mapping as an addendum
to the PC and you leave an actual blank
in the POC. Okay.
last time, Mr. Chair, the with like the
complete streets plan and a few other
things. Yeah, we didn't get it in in
time when we put the PC, but we then had
a plan to come back and uh do an
amendment to the PC and that's okay.
Yeah, because and it should be just
written out as an action and then yeah,
the idea of a placeholder in there uh is
great. But but I do expect that we're
going to hop on that soon. I think it's
a really great thing to do. I just think
that getting the POC done is a really
great thing to do, too. And that one's
got, you know, that's a requirement
because we need to know what we're
marketing. Yes.
Developers
as each box of this kind of development.
And if you're interested in doing that
kind of development, come take a look at
what we and that's not going to be an
easy conversation because the
conservation commission and the economic
development commission have different
goals. That's why to me it's an
essential piece is that you don't need
to it is the plan of conservation
development. So that's why you have and
that's to me my experience is that's the
pro that's the process that never
happens.
On the other side is just like you said
you'll start going out marketing
properties. So things will set up and
then it becomes this and so this I think
the first the first
step resources though the first step get
ready for that conservation commission
needs to go say these are the properties
that we're really excited about and then
economic development needs to do the
same before we go and start talking that
together.
So, so I if I might,
Jed, I think I what you're talking about
and I if if if I'm hearing it correctly,
I think what we're talking about is
possible and it's something that we will
plan to do as part of the full draft of
the plan. Um, you know, each chapter
obviously establishes its own priorities
and we'll work with economic development
over the next month to identify either
specific parcels or parcel criteria
um that will identify, you know, sort of
key development areas obviously along
Route six, maybe key intersections,
maybe key crossings of the Hop River
Trail. Um, that that sort of thing. um
we will you know and so we will we will
create a map of you know maybe high
potential economic development parcels
um obviously there's going to be some
overlap with with conservation because
we're we're dealing with the Route Six
corridor um but but that draft will be
part of the economic development chapter
um as we get towards the end when we do
the implementation and I noted um
implementation and mapping uh for our I
think our September or October meetings
Um there will be what we would call a
future land use map. That is, you know,
the the attempted Hegelian synthesis,
right, of conservation and development.
And obviously, we're not going to nail
every parcel down to say this one's
conservation, this one's development,
that one's development, this one's
conservation. But it will be um our our
our best shot at synthesizing those
goals while reinforcing the you know the
the criteria that that makes them
attractive for one reason or another.
But there will be a map. we will produce
a a future land use map that will
attempt and again not everyone's going
to agree and it'll be ultimately up to
the commission to kind of use their
wisdom and all of the input um that's
provided to to do the best estimate uh
on on the that blend um and and we would
call it a future land use map and and
ideally adopt it with the rest of the
plan um in December and then and then
spend the next several years hacking
Okay, so that was a short answer to a
good
question and probably
not
but I'm struggling to get that ball. We
have to have a lot of combined meetings
over these areas.
We have already had a fair number of
those and get done with, you know, where
we are now. Yeah. And and so just do
yourself. Use the same whatever they're
already using. Just do yourself a favor.
Use the same one starting out when you
start. Even if it's just not for
yourself, just use the same one starting
out. It'll make your life easier. What's
really going to happen if somebody wants
to come and develop one of these pieces
of property? We got three of them for
sale. and then they're they're going to
come in and tell them what they'd like
to do and we're going to try and guide
them in the right direction to get you
know whatever everybody wants there. But
uh right this minute there has not been
a abundance of properties even for sale
but right now we got three of them. It'd
be nice to figure out what would we like
to to do with those. So if any of those
three properties hey you've got no we
need to conserve it you know let us know
and we'll we'll you know figure out okay
so how are we going to go get money to
buy that work with Josh Press or
whatever. Well I'm going to see a map
that comes out that shows properties
that develop focused on because as John
talked about the matrix we have a whole
we did a natural resource inventory. Y
invested a lot of effort into putting
that together that has a variety of data
and that should be used as one of those
tools in evaluating the properties. We
should be baking making decisions based
on data.
So that's you know we can certainly
apply our layer to that and say here's
the potential challenges associated with
Yep. And if if these guys want to get
together and have some of those concess
discussions now, but you know, was I
already
we're already a couple of months later
to get to this discussion point that I
was hoping we were going to be. You
know, it's just the way it
goes. But John told me his team is not
going to be the bottleneck. It's going
to be Ukrainian guys. So, we're going to
have to uh do whatever it takes to get
there, right, John? That's right. And
it's Yeah.
If we do Yep. And that's why, you know,
John came with the schedule to try to
get us to the finish line on time. Let's
not buy the fact that no, we're going to
be a month or two late. Let's do it
right. And if we need to get more
meetings, then you that's what we need
to do. But right this minute, we need
more chapters to go first and then we'll
schedule a meeting. But it I don't I
don't anticipate that we're going to be
able to get through with one meeting a
month to get to the finish line.
Something's going to happen and that's
just the way it is. and we'll do we'll
do what we can and uh if somebody comes
and wants to develop a property I know
Hank you will be there with us to uh be
the little Jimny cricket on our shoulder
to make sure that we're uh we're doing
the very best we can for all that our
commission is that our commission
yeah so okay
um well hey I think it's time for your
nickel now I'm going to turn I think I
I'm going to turn it over to Mar. Oh,
okay.
Okay. Hi. Can you hear me? Okay.
Yes. But we can hear you.
Okay. Okay. Um, so um the group has uh
spent a month or so going over the draft
chapter that was provided and we had a
lot of thoughts on it. We did some
editing. Uh, we sent along some
additional photos to be added. Um, and I
sent it along. Well, we sent the link to
John and Jed. Did you two both get a
chance to look at it?
Yes, I did and I forwarded it out and
maybe John did as well. I can't
remember, but uh, everybody on the
commission has had a chance to see the
update. Okay. Um, so I don't think we
changed anything substantially, but we
did make quite a few revision, excuse
me,
revisions. So, um, it's a lot to go
through. So, I don't think we'll go
through the whole chapter, but, uh, we
would like to know if you had any
questions or concerns.
So, I noticed, you know, and you you had
the question in the draft. It's, uh, it
was where it was talking about the
amount of open space in Connecticut. And
I think it might have said that 76% of
Connecticut is open space or something,
right? Yeah, we weren't sure about that
number.
But that can't be true. Can it be true?
76% of our state is open space.
It It might be It might be undeveloped,
but it's not protected.
So, we just need to
clarify in the draft chapter what that
number means.
I think that reference that the state's
goal was 21% of the state by 2024 which
they didn't hit and that was open space
that the state would be purchasing but
also towns and land trust. So, it was
not just a state. I think the reference
from that 76 that was in the chapter
really talked about uh it was really
that 76 they've hit 76% of the goal. So
I think it was trying to and John you
you you guys wrote that. Yeah. Um I
think it was reflecting more that why uh
Andover's contributions is you know as
the state's trying to hit goals. You
know there's an importance to Andover's
contributions as is other towns
addressing some of these goals. Sorry.
Yeah. It was it was 76% I believe was it
Andover's open space that was was
provided for or accounted by accounted
for by the state and the remainder was
was town and private I think was the
statistic.
Okay. The sentence that's on page 11
says, "As of December
2022, Connecticut Deep and its
conservation partners protected an
estimated
515,000 acres or
76.6% of open space across this state."
So of the open space, I guess they're
saying that we protected 76% or
something.
probably 17 76% of their goal for open
space. Yeah, it
says okay. I can um double check and
just make sure that that's the correct
number.
Oh, yeah. No, I think that's what you
have is Yeah. 76% of its go of the
state's stated goal. Yeah, that's that's
what that statistic is calling out.
I got it. So the state is threequarters
towards its established goal.
And I was
interested. I did not see a draft that
had the new pictures that you sent out
in and my technical skills didn't allow
me to see the new pictures that were
going in. So, I am eagerly looking
forward to seeing the graph that has all
the new pictures that you took in it. I
are Are you asking? Are you saying you
didn't see the I didn't put in the We
haven't We haven't uh We haven't
incorporated any That's sort of final
layout stuff. We We haven't incorporated
the photos. We We got them, Maryann, but
but yeah, we haven't we haven't sort of
finalized the draft and cleaned it all
up. The tech the text is more important
right now. Yes. Well, that's what we
figured. So, yes, they're not in there
yet. They just need to be placed
strategically like the pollinator, you
know, the pollinator garden here where
we talk about the pollinator garden and
you know some of the water views where
we talk about the water quality.
I've just been looking at what we did
receive. You've got pictures labeled
Andover Farmers Market, but that's not
our Andover farmers market. I think that
was from Massachusetts actually. We uh
removed those pictures in the draft.
So we we sent some pictures, but they
shouldn't have included the farmers
market. There were pictures of some
farmers market in the draft and we they
had been exed out in the draft that we
sent back. We wanted to remove the
farmers market photos.
Yeah, we were able to um see the the
comments. We just haven't um gone
through and removed those pictures yet.
Sorry, the light just turned off in the
room. I mean, because they're motion
sensored.
Okay. So, does that answer your question
about
the market pictures? Yeah. Okay.
Um I mean, and while we're mentioning
the market, I did rewrite it a little in
that the market is officially on a
hiatus. that wasn't in progress last
year and there's I couldn't find any
reference anywhere to any plans to do it
this year. So, I just mentioned um I
updated that because the original text
talked about it as an ongoing venture
which it currently is not to my
knowledge. Yeah. Ryan Ryan Fitch would
like to do the farmers market ahead of
his property.
Is that for this for 2025?
He's trying 2025 but more like 2026.
Yeah. No, he you know he's and and and
since we are not you know the town
itself we're not doing it. There's we
don't have anybody to do it and we saw
this as EDC members as kind of an aggra
tourism thing. Yep. And said it's fine
if you want to on your property to do a
farmers market. Right. And where is um
and the other thing there was another uh
there was a food share some sort of
co-op mentioned um I don't have sorry I
don't have the draft open in front of me
um but none of the commission members
the conservation commission members were
familiar with that particular
organization is that still current and
in business who is
um is that still
ongoing someone can verify that and food
pantry in the town of Food share is one
day a week. Uh believe Tuesdays.
No, not I'm sorry, not the food share.
The uh there was some organization with
a picture of a farm. Is it the our farm
our food
LLC? I think
that
is that was never actually located on
that road.
Yeah, we were told. So we'll remove.
All right. Yeah, if you could remove
that because we didn't think that was a
thing. Yeah. Okay. Thank you.
Any
other comments at this
point? And I had, you know, a couple
once we got so on page 22, right before
the
goals, there's a couple of uh, you know,
paragraphs. One is about the cart
program and the other is about recycling
efforts with the uh the composting
program. And I didn't see anything in
the action items that took those
thoughts and made them an action for
anybody.
Well, we're open to suggestions that the
conservation commission
uh is not in charge and does not run the
cart program. So, we'd have to have
someone from cart
with cart. What do you want to know?
Well, it says says we need to
uh increase it. Small stuff increase it.
Andover should continue to maintain and
expand its efforts to reduce, reuse, and
recycle the cart program. The cart
problem is just for return bottles and
cans. Yeah, we're just the return of
bottles and cans. Okay.
Unless the only thing is I I mean I did
a little reading on it. Um when I was on
sustainable CT, they talked about
there's lots of other things you can
recycle. Um, one of the ones was
mattresses that a lot of towns uh
recycle old mattresses. So, I don't know
if we even have the space for it, but
that is the sort of thing that could be
considered an expansion. Well, that's
all part of the transfer station and its
programs, right? That's that's the
transfer station
erover's returnable
treasures stands for
and we're
just taking the money and and splitting
it up among the four organizations that
do it. So as we started reviewing the
current POC to figure out where to go,
there were a lot of great thoughts in
that POC and that's all they stayed at
was great thoughts because nobody was
assigned the action. Nobody was
responsible for it and trying to do
better on that process this time around.
Yeah, it wouldn't be a terrible idea to
identify in the POC in the conservation
chapter a goal of incorporating an
organics recycling program. Um, we know
the municipal waist
streamwide somewhere around 30% of the
total household trash. I think that's a
very followup paragraph in here. It
talks about Andover should consider
sponsoring the composting program at the
transfer station with future organics
entering the wasteland. You know, it's I
think it's great thought. It's just we
somebody needs to do it, you know, and
so because 10 years from now, we're
going to look at that great thought and
who did that? And even if we're assigned
action, it's very clear we got a 50/50
chance of getting to that. So 64. So
that was that was my last Yeah.
Um and and that was
really you know when we well I guess so
I looked
through you know when we uh we we did
the discussion on the action items
report and it said for instance amend
ARD
5.57.5 to replace 75% with 100% of
wetland acreage removed from calculating
a building lot allowances precise. I
said, "That's easy. All I have to do is
cross off 75, write 100, we're good to
go. On to the next one." And I said,
"Wow, is that what we want to do?" You
know, and again, we don't have a lot of
experience with that because we haven't
had any of these big subdivisions put
in. So, I I I always knew when I was
reading the instructions that I don't
know what that really how that's going
to work, but I'm not sure. But I know
I'm not smart enough to face change in
it when the the prevailing thought is
that we're not we don't have developers
feet down the door to come build here
because we're we're too hard to work
with. Well, I was going to just ask that
exact question that you asked. I'm not
sure. I probably ask it better
because Go. No, I think you just pretty
much asked it, but I was going to ask
the same thing. Is it really necessary
and is it really advisable if it's
already at 75% is it necessarily even
practical to make it 100%. Yeah. And and
I don't know and without having you know
because we haven't gone through an
example I don't even know how to start
making that
assessment. Um
but it's it sounds I understand it
sounds good from a conservation
perspective. We want to conserve more.
But
but I think and but if we can serve too
much, nobody's going to come build.
We're gonna conserve it all by default
because nobody's going to come here
doing it. And it says somewhere in here
that the town is already at
23% of open space versus 21%. Yep. So I
think not that we
don't you know it's it's a relatively
small town geographically anyway
compared to a lot of other towns in
Connecticut and I think you know we
should keep proportion in mind
especially with the kind of question
that you and I are just talking about
now while you know Maran and Hank are
here. Yep. Was that number was that
number protected open space or just
Roman numeral
B5
because we did have the very first
zoning ones and the second one similar
says you replace 40% with 50% is the
minimum amount of open space set aside
required. Okay for a conservation
perspective sure bet that sounds good
but is that really what we want? I
think it's another one of those things
that we could probably talk about a lot
before we issue the
plan. And I know on the the current
plan, you know, the uh the thing the
plan talked about going
from R80 to R40 and we ended up at R60
and you know, so there was some
compromise in there. I I understand the
thought, but I think that's going to be
where we get the tension with the
economic development because, you know,
we're not we're not bursting at the
seams with economic development yet
either. It's kind of nothing. So I I
don't know what the I don't know what
the roadblock is for getting these guys
to come in and want to work here in
handover, but the result is that people
like Graas who are on a very small road
on nice and quiet are getting exactly
what they want and that's what 90% of
the town wants. Right. So that's Well, I
do know I mean when I was marketing in
162 acres for several years,
whatever developers looked at it because
it was too much ledge. It was too much
work to build in there. It was going to
cost them too much. So they're going to
go out find a flat property that doesn't
have ledge and that's where they're
going to put their stuff. So I mean, you
know, there's just
Yeah. So yeah, I think part of it is we
have to uh not
land trying to figure out how to how to
find spots that we can develop and
right, you know, bring them in there.
But so I understand what the
conservation commission is driving to
and I agree with it from a conservation
perspective. I'm not just not sure I
agree with it from the town perspective.
Yeah. And we don't have to uh agree with
it. We got till December to uh to really
do that. And and it may be again it's an
action after the POC is issued for us to
go off and do. I would like to have it
all actions that the planning and zoning
commission agreed we want to do before
we put it in there. Um but if we miss we
miss some you know.
Yeah. I to from the conservation
commission perspective unlike the maps
which I think were different opt the the
recommendations that we provided
regarding regulatory changes and so
forth were intended not as when you put
that in the
PC so that's not a it can't be that I
mean you have to follow a process for
regulatory trade um was just saying
these are recommendations that we have
to protect the resources that we've
identified and then the process the
action item going forward. In the case
of example, the wetland region be to
work with the wetlands commission and
follow the regulatory process um for
review and figuring out where you want
to go with regulatory changes. Y um so
those are very processoriented, but
they're they're they're a little
different than sort of identifying
parcels up front and putting them in. It
is. No doubt about it. Then uh then the
last one that I'll mention is just uh
oh it's a wetlands one and
uh we so we're
taking so the first wetlands is to areas
of special concerns with cold water
springs and vertical walls. I said okay
that's yeah I think that's probably way
the right thing to do. It's a cold water
stream.
I don't know the answer to that one.
It's got cold
water in it, you get cold. They're
identified by the deep based on the
characteristics they have. In essence,
they're cold water. So they they
generally have a more porested edge so
that they're not warmed up and they
support things like brook trout, a
variety of organisms. You can't have
them non cold water streams. The water
quality in streams when they start to
get warmer declines. So they're very
interested in protecting cold water
streams because of the wildlife and the
water quality standpoint. Um and so the
other aspect of them is because climate
change they're very vulnerable. We're
seeing significant declines in um uh
stream quality increases in temperatures
um loss of species like brook trout
things like that. So for example, Hop
River the Hop River stream right now is
considered a cold water stream. If you
talk to any of the fisheries folks in
EP, it's right on that edge of whether
it can hold support brook trout. So
depending on decisions made in Colombia
and overor country along that system
will determine whether that system stay
safe like that a water stream system and
likely whether DP would continue to stop
the trial things like that. So there's
various so it's identifying if you were
to look at a lot of state goals they've
identified things like drones water
streams or forests as important for a
variety of reasons um uh that are some
german wildlife some ger water quality
some ger to maintaining buffering water
temperature flood sewage things like
that so that's what
so things like
the river the river are those cold water
stream so it would be burnout Brooks
excellent example of a cold water stream
um it's got a lot of oxygen it's got a
lot of forest around it but depending on
how development goes along would
determine whether it would remain a cold
water
stream so the last action I'll ask for
your perspective on again for the
wetlands says expand the upland view
area including whole water streams and
vert pools to 300 ft from 200. And so I
know we had talked at the wetlands
meeting the other night about the fact
that it was only like yesterday that
people you didn't know they had a ver
pool, didn't care about pool, were cut
down trees and all that you right to the
edge of the vernal pool. And so my
thought was if
we kept that at 200
ft that's a tremendous improvement over
what we've been doing and did we really
need to go to 300 ft on on those. Okay.
Yeah. I certainly can explain. In fact,
one of the documents that we provided is
for all the recommendations that we
made, we have an annotated document that
goes through what the regulation is now.
what the recommended change is including
the wording and the justification for
it. Okay. So if you read that document
you see our justification. So in that
case um the science tells us now that
300 ft is important for protecting
against what we call edge effects and
that's based on research. So edge
effects are when when you do a
development you have what's called
development footprint. So it's the area
that you're disturbingly developing and
obviously that's the service but the
effect of that development and it can be
agriculture it could be a commercial
development housing development it could
be a trail depends on and they will have
depending on the type of development or
activity they will have an extended
impact of distance into the surrounding
environment. So we now know and that's
been studied. There's a body of
literature that's looked at that over
the years and looked at the effects on
soil, looked at invasive species spread,
a variety of different things. So
basically this the what we now know is
we look at that 300 ft. So for example,
if you look at the D's website or if you
look nationally, you'll see they call
and we map po forest in Connecticut.
There's actually a map for Connecticut.
So we can look at what's been mapped as
core forest in Andover and the core
forest is based on bar that is at least
the edge is at least 300 foot distance
from nonforest area because the effects
can bleed in up the 300 ft within that
forest. So what the 300 ft gives you is
is based on what we now know and it
allows you it's not a a an exclusion
zone just like two existing 200 ft is.
It's basically a review area to be able
to look at and assess what the potential
impacts of a particular land use will be
whether it's removable trees, increase
surface, whatever it is. Um, so it gives
it provides you an opportunity to have a
better review on what the impacts might
be associated with those. Okay, so
that's why there's no doubt why you you
done your homework. So you know you can
much better than I would
be restrict of the roads or driveway if
you restrict this was nothing the 300 ft
is a review area
unlike setback. Yeah. So, one of the
recommendations we made associated with
the hot river system is to look at
identifying the hot river as an overlink
zone or something along that line which
you can do in Connecticut and it allows
you to then look at and put in things
like setbacks where you may have 50 foot
or 100 foot setback which would be more
of an exclusion. You say you can't cut
trees within 100 ft of right now. on
where our weapons rigs are. We have it's
100 ft around any weapons review area.
That means that if you're doing a
regulated activity within that, you need
to go before weapons and seek a permit
for it. Doesn't mean you can't do it. It
means you need to assess that and get a
permit with a spe in our existing
regulations in wetlands. They identified
back in 2015 a list of
uh wetlands and water forces that were
of special property. So they upped it to
200 ft basically saying we need that we
need more review around these because
they're sensitive. We value these
because what they are the lake so what
we're saying is yes that's right. We
think you should add a couple more into
that based on the challenges that these
systems face now and not reduce any of
the other ones because that that logic
held true. But we should also reflect
the new science and increase
it. So that's that's the logic behind.
Okay. I have no other questions for the
conservation commission tonight. How
about you guys?
I hear all these things, but I feel like
what you said is it's difficult enough
to get development and things right now
and putting all this in is going to make
it even harder. I know you'd want to
conserve, but I also feel like we need
to do some developers. I don't think
there's a developer out there that would
would have a problem with just
viewing the the property, not wanting to
destroy environment. You know what I
mean? And most developers, if they want
to make sure they're not damaging
things going to be consulted on
every application, it's got to be I
thought it was a proposal to have it
reviewed. Yeah, but there's that time
out. Thank you. All right. because I do
not want to be in what we want to avoid
is this. Yeah. Yeah. So the
reasons the reason you do you put the
effort into the plan and I recognize
that it's hard and it takes time and it
rarely actually happens. The reason you
do that is so you have a
strategic approach that your your
commissions agree on that are moving
forward on vision for the town. Not just
something you pick out each one this
parcel that parcel. It's a strategic
vision that you can go forward with. So
when people come in it doesn't become
this, right? It it becomes it's you know
and and believe me the developers
everybody else will will get that and
understand that what they take advantage
of is when you don't don't have it. And
right now we don't have that. We've got
some good ranks. We've got some good
policies. We've got some we've got we
have it. We need to pull a lot of that
together. This is the plan to do it
because it gives you what it should be
as a 10-year action plan for all your
commissions, conservation commissions
going forward working within the
wetlands to review those and determine
what's the best approach. And you're
right, it is a compromise. But unless
you do that, you're going to end up like
this. It's going to be all right.
Somebody wants to come in and develop
the 162 acres of them and all of a
sudden it's like, you know, a week the
already got an application in. So,
they're already wanting to go. We find
out about it when everybody's like this.
Yeah. It's it's not the way. And what
ends up happening. Guess which side
loses.
Guess which side loses in all those
equations? Every side. No. No. The
conservation side always loses on those
equations because you because that
nobody put in place. Everybody gets
nervous about 300 ft of these and
conservation side will keep whiddling
down and down and we lose what we have.
And make no mistake, those systems out
there, even though we're blessed with an
abundance of resources, they are already
under index. It's not that they're not.
We park our school buses next to the Hop
River. We store our sand next to the Hop
River. We have lots of development along
the Hop River. We have a major road six
along the hot river. They're already
under under
trying to move it out of there. No. And
I'm not I'm not being I don't want to
come across as accusatory. What I'm
trying to say is we don't want the next
25 years to be added to that. Right? You
and it doesn't have to be. There's a lot
of these things that easily could be
dealt with if they were planned for up
front, but won't be dealt with if
they're not for up front. And that's
been my experience.
So I think that that
I I mean with with that plan, that
information and conservation involved
with it, then that would be another push
that we could have to move public works
out by the transfer station. You know
what I mean? You know, looking at the
properties and looking at the land and
say, where would be a better place to be
storing this sand that's all have these
trucks, you know? To me, that's almost
like a that would be fantastic. To me,
that's almost a bridge. We're still at
that stage of understanding what we have
and putting it together and saying,
"Okay, how do we integrate the economic
development goals?" Those goals that I
saw you guys lay out were fantastic.
Yeah, they were when I sit here as a
resident in Andover, they seem like the
right goals. And as a conservationist, I
only wrote down a couple of notes and
okay, here's the areas we have to really
think about and coordinate. And it's the
same. But recreation, same thing. But
unless we do, that's why I was arguing
about unless we do this, you're gonna
come out with masks. We're coming out
with masks. We're not going to and we're
going to say, "Okay, down the road we're
going to do this." And J's right. We
need to have an action plan. We need to
have it, but we need to hold our feet to
the fire on doing that. And the problem
is is it doesn't fit neatly in the
structure. you know, we'll go back and
we'll have our conservation commission
meeting and talk about things and see we
see something come up in P&Z or in the
11s, we'll go, oh, we got to weigh in on
that. But that gets you this because
it's already in process versus knowing
that, okay, we've already thought about
where the development is going. We've
already we're not so much worried about
that. You know, we can take on these
other challenges and be more proactive
with land owners and things like that,
but it unless we do that planning
effectively on the front end,
we are our chances of
getting I work at Brad. I mean, I do a
lot of um process
engineering and the key thing is
graduation. So, I'm all for what he's
saying. I think you have to make the
effort to get together see what we're
doing develop a plan and we can work to
that reality we call it action right
that we can work towards so yeah
okay well I think we
spent
you silly question but on the draft you
gave us all these maps are these little
tiny things are they going to be full
size like this in the final production
or are they going to be the little tiny?
Here's the thing. The value of those
maps we those were inserted as sort of
examples of the types of data we look at
the value of those is putting those in a
GIS system. Okay, which ours so layering
them. So when you look at a parcel for
example or you look at a particular area
town you can say okay what do we have
here from in our pers natural resources
on your perspective it's coming economic
development on Eric's perspective it
might be team infrastructure I'm just
wondering if they're going to be on the
in the plan too not all of those there
will be subsets of those that will help
tell the
story and John's crew working on they
were in that draft but we had a separate
meeting recently um to talk about those
and make some modifications to those.
What I'm arguing for is using the data
and those maps and a layering process
with what their group has. So you're
you're you're basically using
information to
make about using them but not showing.
We're not going to use the the map that
we're going to go to the GIS database
and be able to blow it up and shrink it
down whatever you want. see all the
Yeah, for the for for the most for the
most part the maps inside the document
are are going to be mostly illustrative
and you know and to to do descriptive um
you know the the policy stuff will be
there'll be like a couple of a couple of
larger scale policy maps but but mostly
it'll be sort of an ongoing basis uh
through the GIS.
Okay. I think that uh anything else for
the conservation
chapter? John, you're ready to go take
Yeah, we're gonna Yeah, we'll make the
we'll make the edits to conservation and
we'll be drafting economic development.
Okay. Excellent. And then John, you'll
send us uh once you've made the edits,
you'll send us the new draft so we can
look over it again. Um at this point,
we'll we'll send it to everybody. um as
you know as as the draft. Yeah.
And before uh Maryanne drops off the
screen here, I just want to thank you
for you know joining me with the uh at
the finance committee public hearing
there and uh we did get an awful lot of
funding added back in. Oh, you did? I
thought when when we were done if
whoever made the motion to put 10,000 in
said 25, they would have asked it at
that point. So,
well, that was my I tried with the
money. I said it doesn't have to be 50.
Just put some money in. So, that's
great.
So, thank you.
Okay, we're going to move on to the next
uh item and
uh which would be discussion on status
of proposed changes and zoning now and
zone changes. I think we beat that more
than that. I want to talk about any
more. So, we're going to move on to the
exciting discussion of bylaws changes
and John's got that. We're going to put
it up on the screen. I think it's going
to
go hopefully this could be fairly quick.
I have not run these through. Thanks.
Thanks for putting up with
me. Love that.
[Applause]
Um, so what we're seeing is a small
portion. Eric, can can you make that
bigger or is that going to be from John
that it would have to get bigger than
that to do?
I'll zoom in. We're in there. Okay.
[Music]
Super. Okay. So, um, let me know where
to go. On the first page, there were no
changes from what's been there before.
So, thanks.
Yeah,
me moving that moving to the first red
change there. Yep. It says officers of
the commission shall consist of
chairperson and vice chairperson duly
elected pursuant to article seven which
talks about the election of officers.
So, um, a comment that came in just to
provide, you know, where's where's the
talk about that and put that in there.
So, it changes nothing nothing that
we've been doing. And that's it for page
two. Oops. The uh I'm sorry, down at the
bottom, we deleted the board clerk shall
be a salaried employee of the town
because I don't think she is. That's
correct. Yeah. So, we cross that line
now. Moving on. What's that? What does
that mean? Um,
well, all I can tell you is that the
board clerk is not a salary employee in
the town and so she's a union employee.
So, we figured we would cross out the
requirements and we weren't following
them.
I forget the term.
Is she an independent contract? Yeah.
So she's
not paid by the meaning that she
Okay. So anyhow, it uh doesn't
affect what we're doing.
Going on
to page three.
So, uh, under section
2B
4, it used to say copy of summary
ruling and proof of mailing. And we
don't do summary rulings. And so, we
came up with a different term there,
notice of approval or denial. That's
what Jim creates for us when we're uh
getting ready to uh to vote on things.
and uh approve applications and that
sort of thing. Wetlands does summary
rulings. I probably plagiarized that
right out of theirs when I was this copy
and wasn't smart enough to know the
difference. There are a couple of
differences between wetlands in here.
Is that the word certified later on?
Certified is we deleted that too. Proof
of mailing. So there's a there's a new
process now where well
essentially certified sign receipt is
too hard anymore. mailman never finds
anybody at home when they're trying to
deliver mail and so a lot of places have
been gone and this has been you know
discussed with attorney Bansson he's he
agrees with it that we get proof of
mailing we dropped it off the main we
dropped it off the post office post
office acknowledges receipt and then
uh that's as much as we get with a
receipt with receipt Yep. So, for
instance, when we uh were talking about
the the package that we were supposed to
have got last July for the cell tower
out there at Hers
Farm. I tried to pull the string on,
okay, who signed these? And there is no
sign. The only proof that the
uh attorney had that he had sent it to
us was he had something from the post
office and he delivered them there. I
don't know what happened after they got
to the post office. Um, but I certainly
wasn't I couldn't convince myself that
they came here either. You know, I
talked to a friend of mine who's on the
weapons over in uh Heert and he never
got a copy of the thing either. So, I
don't know what happened, but we didn't
get a cell power package when it came
out. So, does that mean that the
responsibility for actually receiving it
is less definitive? Yes, we still have a
record with a receipt from the post
office, but
and I'm probably way beyond my level of
knowledge there. Jim, if you can help me
out on that, I'd be happy to list
anything you want to say, even though
we're not. Well, I think you covered it
covered. Well,
the problem is I people don't pick up
certain first go to the post office. So,
if you get a notice in your mail saying
go to the post office, you got to leave
work, you know, the next day early. A
lot of times a lot of people don't most
of you don't want you know so they don't
there you go then from
a standpoint if you have all these green
cards flying
around they just track and and it
doesn't matter if this law change you
know statute
changes proof of
certification at least has proof
Yeah, he's got that right with that.
It is a pain. There's a lot of paper.
Sometimes you get three, five, seven,
you know, some 30.
And the other thing about the return
requiring return receipts, there are
still times when I require send stuff
out and you know do that is
that you often don't get the rejection
back for like a month or six weeks and
that's longer than it takes to have the
first public hearing. So, I've had one
where I've gotten five of the green
cards back for Butters, and there's two
that I have no idea what the status is,
and then four weeks later, I get the
mail returned to me, but it's too late
to do anything anyway. So, I don't think
it gains you anything is what I'm
saying. So, I think this is correct.
So I'm not I'm just asking if So if
that's the way it's done now, so there
is some burden of
proof that at least the town something
to the post office. Yeah. Yes. We still
put up the signs and we still put the
notice in the
newspaper. So there's there's a fairly
significant effort to get word out to
anybody who's interested. Okay. Thanks.
But all people have to do is not pick up
the
name. Very simple. Yep. But they don't
want to get that little grainy. So they
just don't. Okay.
Um moving down to the bottom there just
above section three talks about we added
the mainly correspondence, you know, to
what the land use administrative system
does. under zoning enforcement office
the added
responsibility assist the general public
with interpretation of land use
regulations and assist with completeness
of applications and I think that's what
uh Jim has spent a good deal of his time
doing wanted to recognize that
um on to page
four you know Roman numeral 6 prepare
the assistant chairperson in draft
motion and conditions of approval.
That's something that Jim works with me
on before we're getting ready to go to
uh the uh the meeting on an application.
You might even
say
a draft motion and conditions of
approval and or andor denial because I
think in some cases you're going to
actually want to prepare both. Yep. I
know we've done that in the past when I
didn't really understand which way
mission was going to go.
So, you know, we worked out both options
so that we weren't fumbling around.
And that's, you know, one of the things
that that they talked about in the land
use training we went to was, you know,
the process by
which we don't need to be in a hurry
to approve the application. We we get
done with the public hearing. We get all
the information. We think about it a
little bit. And then, you know, that
gives the zoning enforcement officer an
opportunity to prepare uh, you know,
figure out what the conditions of
approval ought to be for approval or for
denial and all that. Then we'll take
care of that at the uh, at the next
meeting. I know there's some times where
it's a fairly easy thing. We try to get
it done on the fly and normally when I'm
trying to come up with conditions of
approval on the fly, I goof it up. So I
like the process where we do it in a
little more formal manner
there. Uh next one coming down talks
about submitting all commission
decisions for publication for newspaper.
You know that this is uh this is where
we put it in the paper so that you know
people get noticed of what we're we're
doing. Then down at the bottom of that
page, before the election of officers, I
added maintain online folders for each
application up to date with pertinent
information, including all PZC
correspondence. When application is
complete, have the application folder
transferred to the archive listing. So
that
uh that's one of my goals
for having zone 8 officer do
that.
Um on elective officers
uh that uh by annual organization
meeting shall be held as part of the
first meeting which is scheduled
following a public election for town
officials. We're not doing an election
for town officials. we don't get
together and figure out who's going to
be the next chairman or vice chairman.
Can I just suggest that you say the
first meeting after any new any new
zoning commission members have been
seated because you may have a meeting
right after an election. There may have
been decision but they may not get the
seat. Do you want to wait till whoever
your new members are seated before you
have any?
Eric, could you could you say that
again?
So, if you have an election
um and then you have a planning and
zoning meeting four or five days later
or a week later, even though the
zoning new commission members may be
elected, they're not yet seated. They're
not yet in session. So it should be the
first meeting after the new officers are
the new members have
seated. So we just we would change it to
say public election for town officials
at which time officers will be elected
and
seated that takes
credited and seated.
Is this what we're talking about? First
meeting which is
scheduled in seated right before any
event.
Oh, shall be right there. At which time?
Oh. Oh, shall
be at which time new members are new
members are seated and officers will be
elected. Elected and and seated. They
get elected first then they get seated
after they're sworn in. Well, no. You're
talking I thought Eric was talking about
Eric was talking about general
membership, not officers. Right. Right.
So, so what happens? You have an
election. A new board member gets
elected. He then after a certain date,
he then gets sworn in and he becomes
seated with the commission. After the
new officers are seated with the
commission, then you hold
elections to elect your officers of the
commission so that the people who are
now on the commission get to vote on
that. Does that make sense?
Yeah. I'm just trying to see. Should we
just should we just say the election the
the following the election and seating
of members? Correct. Yes. Okay.
Does that make sense?
Okay. Uh, moving down to article
alternates. The commission we just added
the word
as just to make the
sentence proper
English. Under meetings, we just said
regular meetings will be held monthly.
you are currently we still say we're the
uh third Monday of the month and
uh and so we took out what the day of
the week was going to be and just said
that the schedule will be posted on the
town website. So, you know, at the end
of the year we come up with a schedule
for the following year. Those are the
dates. If for some reason we don't want
a new one on the third Tuesday, we can
we can change it.
Oh, one of the things I wrestled with in
section four on page six and uh I I
guess we'll just leave it the way it is.
Alternate members of the commission who
are seated at the beginning of the
meeting shall not be replaced by another
member who will rise late. So that we
got to get everybody to show up on time.
If you see somebody uh that's the way
and and my thought just need it that
way.
Sometimes we do have trouble trouble
logging in. Yep, we do. And
uh so if you're not going to be there,
let me know. You know, I tried to delay
start the meeting a little bit, but I
think somebody's going to be there
trying to get to get in. and uh and go
that way. But
u
be the
uh under uh disqualifications.
We we said no member of the commission
shall participate in the hearing or
decision of the commission in which used
to say he is directly or indirectly
interested with putting he she and we
just decided that it would be in which
the member is directly or indirectly. So
we get get that issue out of the
disqualification. Um on page
seven, grammar change there. Uh but
coming down to section six under the
minutes in, uh I don't have this one
straightened out
yet. Maybe Eric knows the process uh how
this is really supposed to work. Says
the commission shall review, amend as
needed, and approve the minutes of all
meetings. Any amendments to the minutes
shall be made in date to the official
copy submitted to the town clerk. After
making amendments, the secretary shall
initial said minutes in the gate final
approval. Um, we don't have a
secretary and I know I've never initial.
I tried to uh understand from Marina
what we did on this. I think she told me
that the way it works according to town
work maybe is that you look at the
minutes and you look at the following
minutes to see if there are any changes
the previous minutes and that's how you
know if there's any changes. Not sure
that's makes most sense to me but I know
so I've got to go out and figure out a
better line there. I forgot to do that
before we got together for this go
through and just for the process if
everybody's fairly happy with the way
the bylaws look what I'll do is I'll run
it through our branch then next meeting
we'll vote on so that's how I plan to do
that section three of that same thing
which interesting incompetence
stenographer show I heard the evidence
of such evidence shall be recorded by
audio recording device. Well, we have
the audio recording device visual, too.
Um, I was going to get rid of the
stographer, but that's still in the
state statute. Got to have stenographer,
so I just left it in there.
And then uh under public
relations under section two uh
I they used to say the commission shall
comply with sections 119 120 121 of the
general
statutes. Uh those statutes no longer
exist. And so
uh these are the words that Mark Grant
suggested to put in there. It's all
three good information
stock and that was really it. So I don't
think there's a lot that anybody would
get all excited about in there but we
did get rid of those Monday meetings and
uh we haven't done those in a while.
So everybody reasonably happy with those
so that if we get the blessing of our
attorney we can vote on those next
month.
Okay, moving
on. Exe I was going to do an executive
session to interview candidates for land
zoning commission alternate member
meetings. I was expecting one more
fellow show up tonight. So he was going
to be here. He's not here. We have one
fell that did show up tonight. He showed
up the last time we got together. talk
about teams. Um, I thought I thought
last time he was going to be uh he would
be an exceptional member of the team.
Still think that I thought we picked
another exceptional member to the team
that had lots of experience. I think the
best way to start out is by an alternate
and so
uh anybody have any questions for
Andreas? You want to hear anything about
his background? I sent out the little
paragraph he uh he sent me.
Um, but I think from his interaction
here tonight, you know, seems like uh he
would be a good guy to uh to have on the
team.
Thank you. Yeah, it's it's really an
honor. Um, thank you for thinking about
me and giving me this
opportunity. I participated
in meetings in high school that was
required for us to do. I went to high
school.
I would say it's kind of fascinating. So
being part of this commission I think
it's important
um you know I think it's I don't want to
say it's a job but it's definitely a job
that's important people transit is doing
the work here and things that you guys
discuss and decisions made affects
everybody here whether they realize it
or not. So I want to be part of that
process, part of that decision making
that represent everybody here, not just
people that um think like me, but people
that don't and kind of find that sweet
spot, middle ground and preserve the the
nature. The reason why we moved here is
because of, you know, tranquility, if
you will, the nature um and the the
history. So we're very happy to be him.
my wife and I, she's an attorney. She's
a real estate attorney. I work at Proud.
I've been there for 14 years. Before
that, I worked in healthcare and I
worked my father's restaurant for 10
years. So, I know about restaurants. I
know about healthcare. I know about I
studied biology at Eastern Connecticut
State University. Um, a couple
engineering degrees through grad. So, I
understand technical stuff as well. And,
um, so I think I know a lot of the
table. I'm also a country guy. I love
tractors, cars, everything in between,
you know.
So, pretty hands on I think. So, yeah.
Anybody got any questions like ask at
this
point bring this up you looked at
minority
representation and the reason I say that
is
CBA
problem alternates are treated kind of
as a separate commission they
are problems with when when Patrick was
on the ballot. help and uh he declined
because we had to have
I can't
rememberation three alternates
right only two of them can be of the
same party
or put forward by the same
not okay but let's
no of the
same in the
Arena right now. We've got one Democrat,
one Republican.
Okay.
So, I knew no matter what we did, we
were okay from that perspective.
Yep. It does. It was very So, I just I
want to make two quick points. The
reason to bring that up is because it is
under state statutes. It's not any of
your land use commissions should be
completely nonpartisan. Anyway, Jim just
brought that up because it's not an
endover thing. It's something that um
you know that we have to adhere to and I
like what you said about you know there
may be times when you know you don't
agree with people and vice versa and it
does happen. You just as you know have
to use your best judgment and go by the
regulations and then if there's any
leeway you should try to be able to
defend your position whether it's
favorable to somebody or less favorable
to somebody.
Yeah. Thank you. Yeah. I think uh I'm
I'm a data guy so I was a little
bit data
regulation. Yeah, sure. We will have
some educational requirements
uh under current state law. Okay. Um if
you do get appointed to this position,
they have a minimum mandatory number of
hours of training. Okay. Um there are a
series of fabulous programs for land use
law. One is by the Connecticut Bar
Association and then the other is by
clear which is the Connecticut land use
academy. Um I would suggest you take the
clear training for basically uh
beginner um you know commission members,
land use commission members
um you know and then a year or two take
the advanced
uh you get a lot out of it and have a
better understanding of what their role
is in the commission. um the commission.
So, you know, Andover has a combined
planning commission and zoning
commission. Towns are allowed to have
them combined or separate commissions.
Since we're small, we operate a combined
commission. Um
and you operate under kind of two
different sets of authority depending on
what you're doing. If you are
uh so when you make
regulations and the commission uh
implements new regulations, you're
basically setting land use law and
you're acting in kind of a judicial
capacity. Um and then if you are if you
have an application before you you're
acting in kind of an executive capacity
and your responsibility so you the
commission gets to make land use law but
then it has to abide by the land use law
that it created. Um so depending on what
you're doing, your authority changes. Um
but but it is there powerful positions.
You have the commission has a lot of say
in the workings um of a town, what can
and can't be done. Absolutely. Just
point in the right direction on where I
need to do that training. There's
information. I can I can Yeah, I can
send some stuff to Andreas also.
Perfect. Yep.
So I will make a motion to
approve Andreas
Coladus as an alder member of the
planning and zoning commission.
Second. Any other
discussion? All in favor say I. I. Any
oppose? Any
abstain? Motion carries 500 Z.
Congratulations.
All right. Thanks, guys. Welcome to the
team.
Pleasure. It's let me I don't get it's
politics. It's a It's a Greek name.
Yeah. Okay. I know. I was saying it
until this part had to get in motion.
That's where the pizza thing comes in. I
I My father's Greek, my mother's
Hungarian, so I speak fluent Hungarian.
If you guys ever come across someone
that doesn't speak English
um you said 500 that's probably
technically
700 alternates are are allowed to vote
on that. That's true.
Y that's pretty knowledge. Yeah. Okay.
Eric used to be the chairman before he'd
be with the town administrator. He's
done a great job. Yeah.
sometimes.
Okay, next up
is correspondence. Jim, got any
correspondence? Farewell cards
that Okay, very good. Administrative
reports
got right along. How about zoning
agent?
Nothing. Wetland water course agent. I
got nothing either. Nothing going on
there.
John, you got anything else for us
tonight? Uh, nothing additional.
Okay. Um, probably looking around there
and here. Nobody else for public speak.
Oh, I want to thank John for helping us
distill all the economic development
commission ideas into the presentation
that I gave tonight. It was a lot of
times literally I took his notes from
our last meeting and transferred it over
my my old PowerPoint. So I want to give
John credit for credits too.
Okay. Thank
you. The
uh approval of the minutes and we got a
couple of
them because I added the agenda then
forgot to do it last month. We'll start
with the the regular meeting public
hearing and regular meeting from
February 18th,
2025. Any
comments on those minutes?
The only comment I had was under old
business executive
session pending litigation involving the
same gravel operation. It was really be
the sand gravel
operation. That's the only thing I had
uh on that. Anybody else have anything?
Make a motion to approve the minutes
from February 18th public hearing and
regular meeting as amended.
Second. Thank you, Leanne. Any further
discussion?
All in favor say I. I. Any
opposed? Any
abstain? That motion passes 500.
Next up is the
uh minutes from March
18th. And the only comment I had on that
was on page
two under administrative reports inland
wetland and water course agent talks
about work beginning on a driveway on
Woodland Street. Question question. And
I think the the question there is to
Woodland Street has the address of the
place where the driveway is going
up. Any other changes to those
minutes? Hearing none, I make a motion
to approve the minutes from March 18th
as second. Okay. Any further
discussion? None.
Call for vote. All in favor say I.
I. Any opposed? Any
abstaining? Motion passes. 5
Z. Next regularly scheduled meeting to
be held as hybrid on May
20th. Any final comments other than Jim?
Thank you so much for everything you've
done over the last
Enjoy retirement that you can travel. I
guess you didn't feel guilty too many
times
taking free and
clear. Thank you for everything you've
done and thanks for staying on during
the training period.
Oh, I was going to ask has anybody heard
anything back from the training on the
22nd? Like I have not seen uh we were
supposed to get links to the training
and all that stuff and uh
diplomas. I've got nothing. Anybody get
anything? No. I sent her an email also.
She responded back there was going to be
ready next week.
Okay.
So who all attended?
And you didn't make it. No, I didn't
make it.
Okay. Okay. So you guys have to do the
uh the clear training if you've already
uh done that at some point this
year before before the end of the year
when I have to send in my little report
to the
selected one of them. Oh, you have to do
four and a half hours. No, I mean I did.
Yeah. That's Yes. contrary to what they
wrote initially in that thing, you know,
and I think what Mark Ransom pointed out
during the training that there's enough
affordable housing in there that we get
our full credit. So, everybody who
attended that training is free and
clear. No more training for another two
years. It's a every two-year
requirement. So, you you'll have to do
and those two like are really pretty
good.
The one thing I would say about the
basic clear course is that there's a lot
of emphasis on reading maps and reading
drawings and stuff like that. And if
you're not really used to looking at
shop drawings or topographical lines on
a map, that can be pretty helpful. So
it's it's it's not the legal aspect.
It's the kind of nuts and bolts of how
you review something and what it looks
like and what it all means. So that may
be of interest. There's three little
clear courses that if you do all three
of them that fulfills the the
requirement and I think you'll find
pretty helpful. They're pretty good.
Yeah. I've looked through the GIC
numerous
times on the end trying to what it
means. So that's interesting.
Any other last minute
discussion? Make a motion we
thank you Ann. All in favor say I. I.
Any opposed? Any obain? Motion passes by
zero. Thank you very much everybody.
Thanks John. Thanks.
Eric, can you So we looked